

RDBMS (Relational DBMS) = stores data in tables with rows (records) and columns
 (fields). Examples: MySQL, PostgreSQL, Oracle, SQL Server.



Schema – Blueprint describing the database structure.

 1. Table

    Definition: A table is a collection of related data organized into rows and columns.

    Analogy: Think of it as an Excel sheet.

2. Row (Record / Tuple)

    Definition: A single, complete set of related data in a table.

    Example:
    (1, "Alice", 25, "London") is one row.


3. Column (Field / Attribute)

    Definition: A single category of data stored in all rows.

    Example: The column name contains values "Alice", "Bob", etc.

4. Keys

Keys are used to uniquely identify records and define relationships between tables.

    a) Primary Key (PK)

            Definition: Uniquely identifies each row in a table.

            Rules:

                Must be unique.

                Cannot be NULL.

                One primary key per table (can be one or more columns).

            Example:
            
                    CREATE TABLE Students (
                        student_id INT PRIMARY KEY,
                        name VARCHAR(50)
                    );

    b) Foreign Key (FK)

        Definition: A column in one table that refers to the Primary Key in another table.

        Purpose: Enforces referential integrity.

        Example:
            CREATE TABLE Orders (
                order_id INT PRIMARY KEY,
                student_id INT,
                FOREIGN KEY (student_id) REFERENCES Students(student_id)
            );

    c) Composite Key

        Definition: A primary key made up of two or more columns.

        Used When: No single column can uniquely identify a row.
        Example:
            CREATE TABLE Enrollment (
                student_id INT,
                course_id INT,
                PRIMARY KEY (student_id, course_id)
            );
            Here, a student can enroll in multiple courses, but (student_id, course_id) pair is unique.
    
5. Candidate Key

    Definition: All columns (or combinations) that can qualify as a Primary Key.

    From these, one is chosen as the PK.

6. Alternate Key

    Definition: Candidate keys that were not chosen as the Primary Key.

7. Unique Key

    Definition: Ensures all values in a column are different.

    Difference from PK:

        Can have multiple unique keys in a table.

        Allows NULL values (PK does not).     
    Example     email in a Students table



8. Super Key

    Definition: Any set of columns that can uniquely identify rows.

    Example: PK, Composite PK, or even PK + extra columns.
            {student_id}, {student_id, name}, {student_id, age} are all super keys


Hierarchy of Keys in RDBMS

    Super Key

        Any set of one or more columns that can uniquely identify a row.

        Example: {student_id}, {email}, {student_id, name}

    Candidate Key (subset of super keys)

        Minimal super keys — no extra/unnecessary columns.

        Example: {student_id}, {email} (if both uniquely identify a student)

    Primary Key (one chosen candidate key)

        The official key for identification in the table.

        Example: {student_id}

    Unique Key (candidate key that’s not the primary key)

        Still a super key because it uniquely identifies rows.

        Example: {email} in a Students table where PK is {student_id}


1. Indexes

    Definition:
    An index is a data structure (often a B-Tree or Hash) that helps 
    the database find rows faster without scanning the entire table.

    Why Use?

        Speeds up SELECT queries.

        Helps with WHERE, JOIN, ORDER BY, GROUP BY operations.

    Trade-off:

        Takes extra storage space.

        Slows down INSERT, UPDATE, and DELETE because indexes must be updated too.

    Types of Indexes:

        Clustered Index

            Rearranges the physical order of table data.

            One per table (often the Primary Key by default).

        Non-Clustered Index

            Stores pointers to the actual rows instead of rearranging them.

            Can have multiple per table.

        Unique Index

            Automatically created when a column is defined as UNIQUE or PRIMARY KEY.

        Composite Index

            Index on multiple columns.

        
        Example:        CREATE INDEX idx_name ON students(name);


--------------------


2. Constraints

Constraints are rules applied on columns to enforce data integrity.
and ensure that stored values meet certain requirements.

    a) NOT NULL

        Ensures: Column cannot have NULL values.

        Example:

                name VARCHAR(50) NOT NULL

    b) UNIQUE

            Ensures: No duplicate values in the column.

            NULL Handling: Allows NULL values (varies by DBMS).

            Example:

        email VARCHAR(100) UNIQUE

    

    c) CHECK

        Ensures: Values meet a specific condition.

        Example:

        age INT CHECK (age >= 18)

    d) DEFAULT

        Sets: Default value if no value is provided.

        Example:

    status VARCHAR(10) DEFAULT 'Active'



What’s the difference between an index and a unique constraint? →

    A unique constraint is about data integrity (no duplicates), while an index
    is about performance. A unique constraint automatically creates a unique index,
    but not all indexes enforce uniqueness.


    
    ------------------------------
1. What is an Index?

    An index is a data structure that improves the speed of data retrieval operations on a table at the cost of additional storage and maintenance overhead.

    Think of it like the index of a book — you don’t read the whole book, you jump to the page you need.

                2. Why Use Indexes?

                    Faster SELECT queries (searching, filtering, sorting).

                    Helps in JOIN operations.

                    Speeds up GROUP BY and ORDER BY queries.

                    Reduces table scan overhead.

                3. Drawbacks

                    Consumes extra storage.

                    Slows down INSERT, UPDATE, DELETE because indexes need to be updated.

                    Over-indexing can reduce overall performance.
                
                5. How Index Works

                        Database engine searches the index structure (B-Tree, Hash, or Bitmap).

                        Finds the location of data in the table.

                        Fetches the actual row from storage.

                        Example:

                    SELECT * FROM Employees WHERE last_name = 'Smith';

                        If last_name is indexed → Database uses the index to jump directly to the matching rows.

                        If no index → Database performs a full table scan.